# This Week in Virology Ep. 364

VR: This Week in Virology. The podcast all about viruses, the kind that make you sick.

From microbe.tv this is TWiV - This Week in Virology, episode number 364, recorded on November 20th, 2015.
Hello everybody, I'm Vincent Racaniello, and you are listening to the podcast all about viruses.

Joining me today from south eastern Michigan, Kathy Spindler.

KS: Hi everybody!

VR: Doing there, Kathy? I'm great, thanks for doing this.

VR: And it is an unusual hour again. 10:30 in the morning, so our feng shui is all messed up. We'll deal with it.
Also joining me from north central Florida: Rich Condit.

RC: Hi! Not really, I'm in Austin, Texas. 

VR: Yeah, that's right.

RC: From Austin, Texas. My home was in north central Florida, but I'm in Austin, Texas, and I'm even an hour earlier than you. But my feng shui is just dandy.

VR: I think yours is always dandy.

RC: Let's roll.

VR: Alright. Today we have two special guests to discuss a paper published very recently online. It was published 9th of November. This paper has generated a lot of press. In my opinion much too negative, but we'll let the authors tell us about that. We have the last and first authors. And the name of the paper is 'A SARS like cluster of circulating bat coronaviruses shows potential for human emergence'.

Joining us, he's a professor at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill: Ralph Baric. Welcome Ralph.

RB: Hey Vince.

VR: Thanks for joining us. And the first author on the paper is a postdoctoral fellow in Ralph's lab: Vineet Menachery. Welcome Vineet.

VM: Hi!

VR: Did I pronounce it terribly?

VM: I've heard much worse.

VR: Menachery, or is it Menachery, right?

VM: Menachery.

VR: I completely understand mispronounced names as you may imagine.
This episode of TWiV is brought you by the Department of Microbiology at the Icaan School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, composed of over twenty virology labs, all in one building in the heart of New York City. This department is a perfect fit for anyone with an interest in pursuing virus research. The department is presently looking to recruit perspective graduate students to apply to the program. The deadline is December 1st. Not too far off, but you do have some time. If you are looking for a postdoc you are encouraged to check out their website. Get in contact with the faculty of interest directly for more information about the department. Visit www.mssm.edu/mic. 

The Department of Microbiology in Mount Sinai here in New York City is where I got my PhD, many many years ago. I graduated in 1980, 20-35 years ago. I loved it. I worked for Peter Palese. I was his first PhD student, and since then the department has gotten better. Lots of great virology as well as immunology there. Great place in New York City, and a big booming medical center. So if you want to do virology research check it out. We appreciate your support of TWiV.

I know Ralph has to leave in about 30 minutes and Vineet will stay with us for a while. So let's dive into this. And maybe Ralph you could start by telling us a little background for this paper. What were the goals of the experiment?

RB: So one of the fundamental problems in emerging virus research is that viruses exist within animal species as a heterogeneous population of related viruses. And that is the case of the SARS-like viruses. These can vary up to 50 percent from the sequence of the SARS epidemic strain that emerged in 2003 that caused 8000 infections and 800 deaths - about 800 deaths - and disappeared from human infections around 2004, 2005. 

But the problem with emerging viruses is that they can reemerge, and they do emerge periodically over time from the animal reservoir. And when they do, they're not usually the same. The sequence is very different, so that vaccines and drugs that were developed against the original epidemic strain may not be affected at all. So if you're interested in developing strategies to protect the public health against future emerging strains you have to have an idea of the hybrid potential - the strains that have high risk potential that are circulating in the animal reservoir. And so the goal of this paper was to try to identify strains that were existing in nature that have capacity to replicate in humans and that were variable from the 2003 epidemic strain. And if we could resurrect those strains and identify them we would be in a much better position to develop and design and test vaccines and antivirals, so that they would have greater breadth and protect against future outbreaks.

VR: And my understanding is that you were interested in the coronaviruses in bats that were SARS-like, right?

RB: That's correct.

VR: And you have for these a lot of sequences, but you don't have virus isolates? Is that also correct?

RB: Over the past decade there have been tremendous advances in metagenomics, and so many groups have been sequencing in essence bat guano or various bat parts, looking for viruses that are harboured within a bat population. And there's about 1300 different bat species. And the current estimates based on that metagenomic analysis is that each bat species has somewhere between five and eight novel bat coronaviruses. Some subset of those are group B coronaviruses that are related to SARS. And so over the past decade sequences have emerged that ranged from 97% identical to SARS to 50% identical. And that's specifically within the spike like protein.

RC: And so the focus on bats is because one way or another - depending on what story you subscribe to - SARS was to have emerged from bats, right?

RC: That's correct so the original hypothesis was that SARS was a bat virus that was spread into civets and raccoon dogs in the open markets of Southeast Asia, adapted to those species in the open markets which were being used for food stocks, and then transferred... the virus adapted to humans. We actually think, and several others have reported: An alternative hypothesis is that SARS was originally a bat virus that jumped immediately into humans and then adapted to civets in the open markets where a transmission cycle was set up. Obviously in the first model it's a two step event requiring mutations to adapt first to the civet and then mutations to adapt to the human. So it seems like future events would be unlikely. The alternative hypothesis was that viruses were harbored within bats that had pre-potential or were pre-poised to replicate efficiently in humans and perhaps civets, and so they could move directly from bat to human. And then, in interacting with the civets in the open market, set up a transmission cycle to maintain the virus in human populations. We actually... My own personal hypothesis is that the second model is more correct, that the bats actually harbor some subset of viruses that are general that can use ACE-2 molecule. ACE-2 is angiotensin one converting enzyme two,
the receptor for SARS docking and entering the cells. And we think there are bat strains that can use the bat ACE-2 molecule, the human ACE-2 molecule and the civet ACE-2 molecule with high efficiency. And hence those viruses would be prepositioned to or a high risk in terms of their ability to initiate a new epidemic.

VR: Now in your paper you use a bat virus called SHC014. Why did you pick that one? A sequence, I should say, because you didn't have actually have the virus, right?

RB: We didn't have the virus. In fact, no one has ever cultured the virus. It only exists in silico, in essence as a full length sequence. So when you model the... I and Vineet did a lot of this work in collaboration with some other postdocs. When you model the receptor binding domain and you look at the residues that are present, that interface with the ACE-2 molecule of bats, civets or humans, there is some conservation. But there were - seven of those residues were different, including I think five or six that occured at really important sites for interaction. 

We knew from some studies in our lab that at least one of those sites were tolerated in terms of being able... one of the resi... mutations in that civet... in that strain that's SHC014 could occur within the context of a wildtype virus and still program efficient entry into human cells. So that was interesting to us.

We were also interested in this strain because it was about 12% different in the spike-like protein sequence. And so it may function as a book end. In other words: If you're trying to identify what cluster of strains were high risk that could use the humans ACE-2 receptor, this might be at the boundary of that cluster. And the reason that's important is if you're developing vaccines or drugs or immunotherapeutics against SARS-like viruses,
you really want to capture the maximal amount of diversity that still would program efficient entry into human cells. Because those would be the most high risk. 

So they had a fair amount of variation. There was some conservation in the receptor binding interface sites. There was variation within some of those sites. At least one of those we knew probably could function... instill... mediate efficient interaction with the human ACE-2 molecule. And so it was worth a try. There were other things we could do with that spike as well, even if it didn't program. In fact we could use it to look at
cross neutralization. And if we made antisera against that SHC014 spike, could it neutralize SARS? That would be another thing we could do.

If the spike was not capable of programming infection, of enameling cells, we could antigenic cartography those types of things. So there's a lot of things we could do with that spike.

RC: I want to make sure i have my context right for the spike-like protein. So this is the thing that sits on the outside of the virus and gives it its crown appearance, hence coronavirus, right? And it's the thing that attaches the virus to the receptor on the cells. Is it solely responsible for entry? Does it do fusion as well, or are there other proteins involved?

12:40

RB: The spike-like protein - in its interaction with cellular components - is a major barrier for cross species transmission of coronaviruses. And it occurs on at least two levels: The first is the ability of that spike to program its ability to bind to receptors on the surface of cells from different species. So in the case of ACE-2 for example, the SARS epidemic strain can bind to the bat ACE-2 receptor, the civet ACE-2 receptor and the human ACE-2 receptor. It binds poorly for example to the rat ACE-2 receptor. And so that first interaction event is key for virus binding to the cell. And that begins to program the downstream steps that are critical for virus entry into that cell. The second major barrier for coronavirus
entry in cross species transmission is proteolitic cleavage of that spike. The coronavirus spike is generally broken into two pieces: An S1 N-terminal domain of about 90 kilodaltons and a C-terminal 90 kilodalton domain. Proteases - and there are four or five, depending on who is doing the study - different proteases have to cleave that spike to cause conformational rearrangements to expose a fusion agenic domain, and that fusion agenic domain that then fuses the envelope of the virus to the surface of the cell or with the surface of an intracellular vesicle to mediate entry into that cell. In the case of coronaviruses there are proteases that can mediate that event at the surface of the cell and intracellularly. 

And so, depending on the spike, the cleavage events may occur on the surface to mediate fusion to the plasmembrane or fusion to internal vesicles internally with the intercellular proteases.

RC: So those are host proteases. And this proteolysis happens in the process of entry, not as before? Ok, ok, great I got it, thanks.

RB: So for example in collaboration with a researcher, he works in Minnesota, named Fang Li... Fang Li has shown that HKU-4, which is a relative to MERS coronavirus, that HKU-4 strain can bind to the same human receptor that MERS does, which is dipeptidyl peptidase-4. And it binds very well to the human DPP-4 molecule. However, the barrier for entry is not in the receptor binding. The human proteases can't cleave the S2 spike and can't activate the fusion domain. So the major barrier for HKU-4, the reason it's not infecting human cells, is because of proteases. Host protease is not being able to process the spike appropriate.

VR: So I think in the interest of time we should continue talking with you Ralph, and then we'll have Vineet go back and go through the experiments in some detail. But your strategy was to take a human SARS coronavirus strain and substitute its spike with that of SHC014. And you found that this could infect human cells and mice. Now that's part of what has generated a lot of controversy about this paper. Because you made a new virus, and Simon Wain-Hobson said, this virus doesn't exist in nature and who knows what would happen if it got out. And so some people have said, 'Why didn't you simply make VSV pseudotype with the spike-like protein of this virus?'

RB: So pseudotyping is a common strategy that's used in viruses to ask particular questions about the functions of surface collector proteins. And we did experiments with pseudotyping in collaboration with our collaborators at Wuhan University. We pseudotyped lentiviruses with the SHC014 spike and some other spikes and other bat coronaviruses and human coronaviruses. The other spikes could program entry into human cells and the SHC014 spike could not. So that data actually suggests that SHC014 would not mediate efficient infection into human cells. Now, there are a variety of problems with pseudotyping experiments. The first is that you don't actually know whether the spike distribution on the surface is appropriate.
You don't know whether the number of spikes on the surface of that pseudotyped particle are in the right organization. And you don't know if they are functional in that context. And so a positive gives you some level of assurance that a spike can program entry into the cell. A negative doesn't necessarily mean that the spike is not capable of mediating infection. So we felt that it would be prudent on our part to more rigorously test that, and so we made the chimera.

VR: Simon Wain-Hobson has said that if this virus got out you couldn't predict what would happen in people. How do you address that?

RB: Number one, it's unlikely that the SHC014 spike, which as far as we can tell has never circulated through a human population, would be capable of programming a serious infection as the SARS epidemic strain was capable of doing. We have no evidence... no idea... no understanding of coronavirus transmission... the genetic factors that regulate coronavirus transmission. Since SHC014 had never been transmitted through human populations it would be unlikely that it would be as efficiently programmed for causing transmission between humans.

SARS, in all of its glory, both in 2003 and in 2004 and 2005 was controlled by public health intervention strategies. Quarantine, contact tracing was able to stop the epidemic, to stop the re-emergence of the virus in 2004.

Third, I think what many people don't understand is that coronaviruses undergo recombination at fairly high frequency. So in any kind of mixed infection 30% of the progeny can be recombinants. And in the case of many of the bat viruses within the metagenomic sequence databases, there is lots of evidence that recombination has affected the population's genetic structure of coronavirus family. And in fact modular evolution occur where individual genes can be swapped from one strain to the next - not only the full length gene but also functional component parts of the coronavirus spike can be transferred from one strain to the next.

So even the receptor binding domain to some extent may be interchangeable among closely related strains. And since bats - many... some bats, not all bats, obviously - but some bats live in these large [...] populations with several species coinhabiting with them harboring up to five to eight different bat coronaviruses at a time. Recombination is fluid in coronaviruses, and the spike is well adapted to handle recombinant molecules. So anyone's argument that these kind of events can't occur is basically not knowledgeable about coronaviruses.

So, this isn't something that would not ever occur in nature. It probably occurs in nature and can occur quite frequently.

VR: What kind of containment do you use to do these experiments?

RB: We use BSL-3. We work under BSL-3 settings. This is a high containment research lab under negative pressure. All the researchers in the lab wear [...] and [...] suits. These are personal air breathing apparatuses that strap the air of virus particles. So they are in essence in a containment suit. All research is done in a safety cabinet that's called a BSL-2 safety cabinet. The virus is not free outside of that cabinet at any moment. And then we have fairly vigorous reporting standards in terms of infection for all, in that anyone who does come down with a cold immediately reports to occupational self health and safety [...]. A group of physicians as well as EHS officers become engaged to track the infection in these individuals. And most of the time this is like common cold. In fact every single time it's been a common cold. And then in some instances they may be quarantined at home for two or three days. In other instances, if they don't break fever, they'll just be watched. And if a serious infection occurs, they can be hospitalized.

RC: These experiments began before the gain of function moratorium, if i understand it correctly. And you've had some communication with NIH during the course of the experiments hence. Can you describe that?

RB: We had submitted paperwork to do these experiments, I believe in April 2014, and started the experiments in May 2014. We had actually contacted our program officer under which we were doing these experiments in the summer of 2014 to talk about them in more detail. When the moratorium hit,
we immediately called them. We talked to them about what our responsibilities would be and is this under this pause? And I had several grants at the time, so that different things happened. So for example, we were one of the groups that were asked to develop mouse models for MERS coronavirus
which required passage in the mouse. And those experiments were immediately halted until appropriate paperwork would be submitted. And then we were released to continue those experiments right before christmas in 2015. We had other grants that were funded that they would not release the funds until the paperworks associated with - experiments that NIH had identified as potential gain of function - were addressed to a committee satisfaction. 

The committee that actually makes these decision, I am not privy to its organization or how they deliberate. So it's a black box to the researcher. And they will either decide that experiments do not represent a gain of function. Or they will decide that this could be a gain of function and they will ask for a risk assessment in terms of what we would do. For example, if the SHC014 virus had replicated more efficiently than wildtype SARS virus in human airway epithelial cells in terms of about a log titer, or was more pathogenic in mice, the way we were given approval to do these experiments - if either of those events happened, we would immediately notify our environmental health and science [...] department and the IDC. We would then immediately notify NIH. We would stop all experiments, and a group would be convened to make a decision about how to proceed. That decision would be [...] a letter at [...]. So if that group decided that these experiments would be dangerous to proceed, and they wanted us to destroy it, then we would destroy it, and that would be the end of the experiment. Fortunately in this case, SHC014, the full length virus, replicated less efficently in human airway epithelial cells, and even the chimera was attenuated in mice, and it didn't replicate any better than wildtype SARS. So that data suggested that we really hadn't gained function.

VR: In your in your discussion you write that the data are at a crossroads of gain of function research concerns. Maybe in the last few minutes that you're here with us maybe you could expand on that a bit?

RB: So at this point the final tools that determine gain of function had not been established and are being deliberated by a group I believe the NSABB but I'm actually less sure exactly what the group is. I [...] another group that's making the decisions.

VR: I am, too... I have no idea.

RB: So anyway, that group is going to come down with a series of rules and regulations that people are going to have to follow the boundaries of which I don't believe have been said. So it's quite possible that these experiments would never be allowed at all. And I think that would be tragic,
because the only way that... So we have a resource problem with emerging pathogens, and this is the same resource problem with SARS and with MERS and with Ebola or Nipah or Hendra virus. These viruses are highly heterogeneous. They're just in nature, they spill out at periodic intervals and they cause significant morbidity and mortality and economic hardship. 

And a single vaccine is not going to solve the problem. A single human monoclonal antibody therapy is not going to solve the problem. We have to have the reagents in hand that allows us to develop broad based therapies and vaccines and drugs. And we can develop drugs but if we don't have highly variant viruses to test them against, we'll never really know whether they work until an outbreak occurs. And so that leaves I think the research community in a kind of a catch-22. We have two choices: We can take a reactionary response or a reactionary approach, where we wait for outbreaks to occur. Families lose their loved ones, and the research community then initiates a massive and parallel effort to develop a drug and a vaccine that will work against this new unknown. That's a very painful setting for humanity, and that's the standard that has been used for responding to new disease outbreaks for most of our existence on this planet. 

The other approach is taking a proactive response, where we try to identify representative strains within this family or this swarm of related viruses. And as we develop drugs and vaccines we now have reagents to ask whether they have breadth of activity. And so we actually have some very interesting data with new drugs that may work in SARS and MERS, and it looks like we'll be testing soon whether they would work against these related proved to be SARS-like viruses. And in fact it turns out... if they turn out to be effective, then we actually will have a reagent on the shelve that will be available to respond in future outbreaks. If they don't work we have reagents now available so that second generation compounds could be modified and targeted so that they'd be more ... entire cluster. And so we're interested in that as a conceptual approach to provide an alternative future in the case of an outbreak of highly pathogenic respiratory coronaviruses.

VR: It seems to me that as science progresses, we have to change our approach. As you say, we don't use the old approach, we get proactive. And your paper - and we'll hear the details from Vineet in a moment - it so beautifully shows that there are spikes out there in bats, spike genes that are not neutralized by monoclonals, they're not taken care of by vaccines - SARS vaccines - and we need to know what's out there. And as you said, make broadly active inhibitors. It seems to me that anyone who says this work doesn't tell us anything simply hasn't read the paper or doesn't understand it.

RB: I agree completely. And I think it's... The other thing that individuals need to think about is that in the 21st century we've had two major new emerging highly pathogenic respiratory coronaviruses appear in human populations: SARS coronavirus is one, and MERS coronavirus is currently the second one, and that outbreak is still ongoing. In the animal world, [...] epidemic diarrhea virus which emerged 20 years ago, 25 years ago and slowly moved across Europe, became highly pathogenic in the early 2000s in South East Asia. It then spread in the US in 2013. In the US it killed eight million pigs in the span of just several months. All told, the virus killed a billion swine since it arrived in South East Asia. So the pathogenic potential and the scope of an outbreak from a highly pathogenic coronavirus is potentially enormous. And from a policy point of view it is critical to know that there are viruses in nature that are preprogrammed to move fluidly from one species to the next. And if you know that you know you need to begin to do at least put some resources into developing effective drugs and vaccines. And there are no effective drugs and vaccines against SARS or MERS. And that's the situation we're in, 12 years after the SARS epidemic emerged in 2003, and i think that's unacceptable.

VR: Ralph, I want to thank you for joining us. I know you have to go now. I am arranging a trip to Chapel Hill next year, maybe we can sit down and talk even longer about a variety of interesting virological questions?

RB: I'll look forward to that.

VR: Thank you, Ralph.

RB: Ok, bye. Bye, Kathy and Rich. Nice talking to you.

KS: Bye Ralph, Thanks. Bye bye.

VR: This episode of TWiV is also sponsored by ASM education department. Grad students, postdocs and early career scientists are invited to apply to attend the ASM scientific writing and publishing webinar series. This is a three month six part program that takes place from January through March of 2016. So it's a webinar you can stay in the comfort of your home or office and learn great things about writing. You'll learn from ASM journal editors about the whole scientific writing and publishing process. These are people who been involved in this for many years and know what they're talking about. And the things that will be discussed include titles and abstracts, how to write them and make them attractive. Figures, figure legends and the whole manuscript review process. Once again, it's a three months six part series. Two parts a month from January through March of 2016. They are taking applications for the program you can find more about it at bit.ly/swpionline15, all one word. We thank ASM education for their support of TWiV.

Alright, Vineet.

VM: I'll move over into the chair.

VR: For the moment let's circle back to that first series of experiments with the SHC014 spike and the background of SARS. Tell us what you did there.

VM: So as Ralph said, we have the spikes and our collaborateurs at the Wuhan Institute have developed... they've isolated a number of sequences. So I think in their original paper in 2013 they reported eighteen spike sequences and a couple of full length viruses. One SHC014, one they called WIV-1 which was the virus they were able to isolate. That virus was able to use human ACE-2, and so that's the clinical isolate that they were able to actually isolate out of the bat guano. Which, for those of you who have ever worked with that, it's really an amazing thing that they were able to isolate that virus at all. 

Building from that, SHC014 is the next virus down in terms of closeness to the epidemic strains. It's about 12% different. And when we first started looking at the strain we had looked at the modeling. And we have a number of people in our group and other groups that have done modeling of the RBD. A lot of those studies were based on escape mutants and other interactions. The majority of the antibodies that have been generated against SARS - monoclonal antibodies that have been thought to be therapeutic or used for therapeutic purposes - focus on the receptor binding domain. And so a lot of the changes that we see there, we actually think we understand the interactions pretty well.

And so when we look at SHC014, there are 14 contact residues that are thought to interact between the SARS spike and the human ACE-2 molecule. Of those 14, SHC014 has changes at seven of those positions. And of those 14 there are five that have been shown to be critical for binding and species specificity. And all five of those had been changed at SHC014. This is in contrast to what we saw with WIV-1. WIV-1 only has three changes in those fourteen residues. And of those three they are actually very conservative substitutions. And so we weren't particularly surprised that WIV-1 could bind. We would have probably potentially predicted that. And our collaborators in Wuhan shared with us their pseudotyping data where they had taken the spikes using a lentivirus system and had shown that with their SARS wild type spike and the WIV-1 spike that the virus could enter using human ACE-2. And it showed pretty clearly that SHC014 and the pseudotyping experiment could not. And that was they used HKU-3 which is at the other end of the group 2B spectrum in terms of the depth, of the width of the coronavirus group. From those studies all of the predictions are that this virus shouldn't be able to grow. 

VR: In human cells, you mean.

VM: In human cells, in using human ACE-2 at a minimum. And they had used human... And in their pseudotyping experiments they had used a number of orthologs. And i can't remember if they used bat, but for what they found as they had no evidence that ACE-2 - bat, civet or human - could use that ACE-2 molecule. And that kind of made sense based on the fact that there are seven amino acid changes. Ralph mentioned there are changes that we see in SHC014 that we've seen in strains that can bind human ACE-2. A couple of those mutations had been seen in civet strains but as individuals. So of the 14 we had seen one change that corresponded to the SHC014. But that's one out of the seven. So there is evidence that indicate that binding could happen but I don't know that it was or is conclusive in that way. 

And so when we made these viruses, it was under the premise that it is probably likely that this virus wouldn't grow. It doesn't mean that we couldn't use it for other aspects that Ralph talked about - in cartography and making antibiotic, making vaccine responses against this spike would actually be interesting, because it may actually lead to antibodies that are outside of the receptor binding domain, that may actually be cross protective against the entire group. So that was the premise of the studies.

And so we built the chimeric viruses. Ralph and I had a discussion on whether we thought that the virus would work or not. When I was originally doing the experiments, I wasn't thinking that it would. And so when we were able to recover virus from the Veros that we transfected into, it was surprising to me. Ralph claims that he wasn't surprised, but...

RC: So the chimeric virus you're talking about is: You're taking the SHC014 spike protein and swapping that into a mouse adapted coronavrius... swapping the spike protein on the mouse adapted coronavirus for with this SHC014 virus spike protein, correct?

VM: Correct, that is exactly it.

RC: So, theoretically you're confining your attention there primarily to whether the spike protein is going to function in that context for binding and entry of a virus that is otherwise already adapted to the mouse, right?

VM: Yes, and I think that is an important point. When we think about the spike, a lot of the focus after the outbreak was - and continuing rightly so - is on the ability of the virus to bind to the receptor. But coronaviruses are really large, they are the largest RNA coronaviruses. There is 28 to 30 kb. And for a number of reasons the backbone may not actually support replication in human cells itself. So this separates out whether the spike can mediate entry and whether the whole virus... So there may be aspects of the backbone of SHC014 that make it unable to grow, whether it be controlling the host immune response or some interaction with the cellular machinery that the full length virus may not have been able to grow, but it has actually nothing to do with the spike protein. So this controls for that in a way. And if we had known SHC014... if we had predicted that it would grow, there is value in making the chimera as well. We'll talk about that a little bit more as we go through the data.

VR: Why did you decide to use the mouse adapted strain? Did you already think, well, we could do some mouse experiments if it does grow?

VM: Well, yes. Yeah, for a number of reasons. Doing mouse experiments gives us a lot of information on pathogenicity. It also allows us to ask questions. If the virus does grow but doesn't grow particularly well, we can ask questions about using an SHC014 based virus as a vaccine. It also - well, we don't have any hard evidence for this - in general we do believe that adaptation to the mouse is not particularly helpful with a human. So we've done the studies where we have compared the mouse adapted strain to the wild type strain in human airway epithelial cells. We don't see a marked difference between them. If anything, the mouse adapted strain is not efficiently... it's always less. But it's twofold, threefold, fivefold differences that are not biologically important. And so we don't have any reason to say that this virus is more virulent, and we don't have the data to say that it's less virulent in human, you know, that adaptational way. Unfortunately, the other way you could really do that is maybe non-human primate studies or, I don't know that anybody volunteered for human challenge studies, but... 

RC: This mouse adapted strain, that is a SARS strain that was adapted to mice, is that correct?

VM: Yeah, so isolate of SARS was taken and passaged into mice. MA-15 was the name of it. It was passaged 15 times, and it gained virulence in balb/c mice. And that is the strain that we almost always use in our mouse experiments. So in a balb mouse 1x10^5 on a ten week old mouse will result in lethality. And that varies based on the genetic background. Balb 6 mice at ten weeks are resistant. And there are elements of this model as you age the mice a year old mouse is much more susceptible, much more than [lb-50]. And so there are elements that this SARS model recapitulates both the human disease aspects and are affected by both genetic components as well as aging components.

RC: And do you know what the genetic correlates of that adaptation are?

VM: There are six changes. There is one in spike. So there is a Y46H mutation which we think increases the affinity of the virus to the mouse receptor. It doesn't ablate interaction with the human receptorm but we do think that this virus is able to bind the mouse receptor better. And that mutation alone is not sufficient to increase pathogenicity to the full MA-15 virus, but it captures a lot of that. So that mutation in spike is required for pathogenicity, but alone it is not sufficient. So there are other changes in the backbone of the virus that are required, and we've done several mouse adapted strains trying to figure out what components and how their interaction with host components are driving this response. And so there are mutations at other locations in the backbone. And we haven't really figured out exactly what it is. 

VR: This is the kind of experiment you could not do today, right?

VM: Mouse adaptation of SARS would not be... It falls under the pause. So the increase of pathogenicity in a mammalian model, right? Is it making it more pathogenic in humans? The answer is, we don't know. And there's really no great way to test it. But we also have to remember that this, the SARS epidemic strain, passed through a lot of people and did plenty of adaptation in humans already. So we don't know if we could gain more adaptation from it.

VR: You know, traditionally you think of passing a virus in a non human host attenuates it for humans. That's how you make live attenuated vaccines. So if I was...

RC: You know, I am almost ready to volunteer for this, you know? Stick me in a BSL-3 facility and I'll snort some of this stuff and see what happens.

VR: I'm afraid you can't do that, Rich.

RC: No?

VM: I will mention that to Ralph.

VR: I think your family would like that.
But if you look at all the information we gained from studying this mouse adapted SARS virus, it's tremendous! And it's been around for years. It hasn't done anything, it hasn't escaped, it hasn't infected people. Why can't we use that as some data and say, this is good stuff to do and it's safe. I just don't understand why that's overlooked. I don't expect you to answer that, Vineet. I'm just complaining.

RC: The other interesting thing that came up is that you adapted to one strain of mice and it's not necessarily adapted to another strain of mice. So these adaptations are really highly specific not only just to species but even strains of varieties. 

VM: Yeah, if Ralph was on I am sure he would talk about the collaborative cross. So, for those of you who are unfamiliar, the collaborative cross is a genetically diverse mouse panel, and it takes eight founder strains. And over the past twenty years they've been developing mice to capture genetic diversity using these founder strains that have five lab derived strains and three wild derived strains. And while it's not equivalent to
human genetic diversity, it captures the same level. And in those mice, when we put SARS in those mice, we get the full range. We have mice that are completely refractory and gain weight after infection, and we have mice that rapidly lose weight and are highly susceptible. 

And one of Ralph's major projects in addition to what we're doing with these coronaviruses is identifying host factors that drive susceptibility.  Because it may not just be the virus that infects a person is important, and the genetic background of that virus is important. But the person itself and their physiological conditions and their genetics and how old they are really matter in these kind of emergence questions as well.

VR: Ok, Vineet, tell us what you found when you made this virus.

VM: We've taken the SHC014. We made the chimeric virus and we started with Vero cells. We found that it replicated equivalently in Vero cells which don't have a strong immune response. So our next step was to look in...

VR: And for those who don't know, those are monkey cells, right?

VM: African green monkey kidney cells. And then we went to respiratory cells. Calu-3 are a cell line that... we used we the 2B4 version of these. These have been sorted for ACE-2 expression.

VR: And they are human, right?

VM: They are human cells, type two alveolar cells, closest to alveolar cells. And then primary human airway cultures. So these are derived from lung transplant donors. So the both upper branches of the airway are available. They are not always used. And so our researcher here in the cystic fibrosis core, Scott Randell, harvests these and is able to make cultures. And it takes weeks to make these, and he's been doing it for several years, where you plaque the cells and you can actually differentiate them into ciliated primary human airway cells. And so they grow an air liquid interface. You have an insert, the top portion is exposed to the air. You can actually see the cilia, and they meet, and the lower layer has the basolateral media. And so they mimic the human airway as well as any cell culture model could. 

And we've done a number of studies with SARS over the years with these cultures. And we started with those, with the SHC014 in the SARS backbone
and compared it directly to the epidemic strain, the epidemic Urbani strain, and found that it could replicate equivalently to the epidemic strain.
And from there we took that same virus and infected mice. This was ten week old BALB/c mice, and found that it was not as pathogenic as the mouse adapted MA-15. So those mice challenges, 1x10^4, those die between four and six days post infection. The SHC014 mouse adapted virus, the SARS backbone virus, caused about 10% weight lost in BALB/c mice. Significant disease, but not particularly lethal. What was interesting to us was that the titers were roughly equivalent two days post infection between the viruses. And it appeared that the virus was able to carry out a lot of the same program that the (mouse adapted) epidemic strain could.

And so the spike had mediated ability to replicate in human cells, and while it didn't cause equivalent disease, it was causing disease in mice. That wasn't equivalent to the mouse adapted strain, but it was definitely not attenuated. 

VR: It has reduced virulence, in that whether you can use that as any kind of comfort, I don't know. Because mice are not people as we often say on this show. But in many cases when you make artificial viruses - and I would say this is an artificial virus as we don't know if it exists out there - you interfere with the ability of the virus to cause disease. So this is not surprising, right?

RC: Let me make sure I understand this. The hybrid virus with the spike-like protein from the bat in the mouse adapted backbone...

VR: Not bat, but bat virus!

RC: ... bat virus, sorry, is not quite the same as the mouse adapted virus itself in animals, correct?

VM: Right, it is not. Not at all. And in a lot of ways. And I think there's actually a lot of interesting aspects about it, and we didn't really have an opportunity to expand on this. But one of the observations - it's in the paper, but we didn't go into length about this - was we actually see a tropism difference between the SHC014 and the (mouse adapted) epidemic strain. So the MA-15, the mouse adapted SARS wildtype, infects both the airway and the parenchyma, when you look at the lung sections. It's very clear the virus is in all areas of the lung.

In contrast, SHC014 in the SARS backbone only is replicating, or only stains, in the parenchyma. And the airways are largely absent, the large areas are largely absent of any viral antigen. Which is really interesting in terms of pathogenesis and exposure. And considering that our titers were very similar, it argues that there may be actual tropism differences, and these tropism differences may have to do with protease cleavage and the ability to infect those cells. And it's actual something we're following up on now. We've been looking at host proteases that may be differential between the two in those locations. And so it actually argues that one of the reasons that SHC014 may be attenuated relative to the mouse adapted strain is that it does not affect these airway cells. These large airways are not getting infected.

It's a real opportunity, I think, and something we are really interested in. So much of the focus on the spike protein, and rightly so, has been focused on the ability to bind. So a lot of the focus has been really on this RBD region, and there is a lot of difference in this region. Less focus has been on the protease cleavage site and the importance of that in emergence. And one of the things that this virus actually gives an opportunity to: We can actually look at this attenuation and ask, Are we going to be able to attenuate the mouse adapted epidemic strain by doing a domain swap? If we take the receptor binding domain of SHC014 and put it into the SARS backbone, will that reduce its ability to replicate? Or if we take a chunk off the protease cleavage site and find that it is not as efficient - that may be a critical step in emergence that we've never even considered before.

And we couldn't have done without a virus that actually binds to humans ACE-2. And it is something that we're pursuing now. We're asking these kinds of questions that, while the SHC014 virus is able to grow, it is not equivalent to SARS. And that can actually inform how the epidemic became an epidemic. I mean, i think we're still very early in this response but there are lots of tools here in telling us more about how these viruses emerge, by going from the bat to the human and comparing them between the two. 

RC: Although it's logical, I still find it fascinating that subtle changes in the spike protein could affect what tissues in the host are infected and thereby affect pathogenesis. That's really interested.

VR: Kathy

KS: I was just going to say that I think in this figure where you do show that histopathology, it's a really nice convincing figure about the difference in tropism with the O14 strain compared to the epidemic strain. And I understand that at some point something on the order of two thousand words had to be cut from this manuscript, and so you show this one figure about tropism difference. Are there other things that are going to end up coming out somewhere else in terms of this, that you could mention at this point? Differences between the two viruses?

VM: I wonder how much i should say. So this is worth a year our former student Lisa Gralinsky is working on. We have a number of mice that have protease... We have protease knockout mice, human, host protease knockouts. And we have one where the epidemic mouse adapted strain, MA-15, there is no phenotype - it looks exactly the same as the wild type - and that the SHC014 virus which causes about 10% weight loss, has no phenotype, has no replication. It's very low. So we think that that protease may be critical. I'll let Lisa... If you want to talk to Lisa...

KS: Sure! What you mentioned about the collaborate cross - I know you're a coauthor on the paper that's in PLOS genetics, that maybe we can stick it in the show notes, it's one of the cases where the collaborative cross has been used for infectious virus, looking at genetic differences in disease susceptability. It's one that's being cited now. It's open access and we can show that. 

VR: Can you stick that in the show notes?

KS: It's already there.

VR: Very good.
Alright, Vineet, what do we do next? Let's move on.

VM: At this point we have built the chimeric viruses. Once we knew that it was viable, we ordered and we started process of getting the full length viruses made. Obviously, making the SARS... Making the spike is not trivial, and making a full 28kb genome is even less. It takes time.

And so we initiated studies asking questions about the therapeutics that we had available to us. And so we think vaccines, and we think monoclonal antibodies. And so, the monclonal antibodies - we've had a long standing collaboration with Wayne Marasco's group at Harvard and then Antonio Lanzavecchia's group, making antibodies for SARS. And then a number of studies that we've done over the years where they have given us antibodies and we've created escape mutants and then they've made new antibodies against these escape mutants. The idea was that we could drive an antibody response, make a panel of antibodies that could really block anything out there. And we spent a lot of time making chimeric viruses with civet strains and diverse strains trying to figure out ways to improve this antibody and its breadth.

And so with SHC014 and how different it was in the receptor binding domain, we saw an opportunity to ask the question, do the antibodies that we would pick... And the four antibodies that were in the paper are what we would have used if we were designing a ZMapp, a ZMapp equivalent for SARS. These are the four antibodies that we would have picked. And so in vitro we took these antibodies and we asked whether they were able to neutralize
SARS - which it does - and SHC014. And in all of them, the neutralization was weak at best. Three of them were outright failures that we didn't get over fifty percent neutralization. One of them approaches fifty percent, but you would have to use, in a human, grams of antibody. 

And part of the reason is - and we map a lot of these antibodies - we know exactly where they bind. Almost all of them are binding within the receptor binding domain. And why did we make antibodies that bind to the receptor binding domain? Well, they are highly neutralizing, and they are the strongest of them. And for the most part of the expectation was, the viruses that are SARS like that could bind to human ACE-2 wouldn't tolerate major changes in the ACE-2 binding region. And here we find very clearly that SHC014 had a very different RBD and could escape these antibodies, because the residues are different. And whether the tract of the binding is slightly different and that's the difference that we see. Whatever the reason that these antibodies don't bind, despite the ability of this virus to replicate - it really clearly showed that our antibody responses, what we've developed are not sufficient. And I think what is important is that Lanzavecchia's group and Marasco's, they have a number of antibodies that we have tested in the initial phases. But we kind of went with what worked, and we have an opportunity to go back to those antibody stocks - the ones that maybe we didn't go through first - and ask which ones are there, which ones can we expand upon and look at with this SHC014 virus? And actually maybe find something, a better treatment model. And it may be just adding another antibody that has more broad response. 

Unfortunately we couldn't have done this without this SHC virus. That's kind of, as Ralph talked about earlier, the book end. Without a virus that was in the middle we really didn't have an opportunity to do that. We needed something that was different enough to really chase down antibodies that are outside of RBD.

VR: So this result scares a lot of people. But you need to know this, right? It's like Ralph said, you gonna wait for something to arise that you can't treat with monoclonals, or are you going to be proactive? And here this shows you that there's spike genes in bats - SARS like viruses circulating - that are really different. And this tells us we should try, as you say, make something more broadly neutralizing, right?

VM: And I think - and Ralph is right about that - you know, SHC014 may never emerge, but we can improve the cocktail with this. And it's not that we don't have these resources, it's just that if any... If you would have asked me whether the antibodies would work, I mean, I dont want to
appear that I am always wrong, but consistently in this paper, I really thought one of these four antibodies would have worked. And I was surprised that one of them didn't work. And I think the most interesting science is when you're wrong. But I think this is an opportunity. I think this is why we want to do it. We are in better position to deal with a group 2B coronavirus because of this SHC014 virus. And moving forward, there is a lot of opportunity to learn about emergence and therapeutics from that information. 

RC: I'd rather be scared than ignorant, you know.

VR: Yes, I think this a good point. You have to take some risk when you do science. Anything that doesn't have risk is not going to be very good all the time. So I think that, you know, you mitigate the risk and you do the experiments. I just think the people who criticize this don't understand that. They don't, as Ralph said, they don't know the whole field of coronaviruses. It makes it hard for them to realize what is going on. And I recognise that that's an issue, and I think they should listen to this episode. They won't. That's the problem.

Vineet, then you did some vaccination studies, right, with this virus?

VM: Yeah, we have lots of different approaches for vaccination. In the field a lot of effort was made to make an inactivated vaccine. That's a SARS particle that was doubly inactivated, I think we call it DIV in the manuscript, and it's been shown to be effective in young mice. And then our group had gone back and done this in older mice, year old mice, and found that there was immune pathology. And as the mice got older, the vaccine responses wained, and actually were partially pathogenic. It was actually worse to have this vaccine than to not be vaccinated. Another aspect was that if you challenged the virus that was heterologously different, you amplified those immune pathology responses. And so the DIV vaccine itself was not particularly well received after that point and isn't really a viable candidate moving forward. But we tested the ability of that because
it is a full length SARS virus, and we wondered if this DIV vaccine could protect against this SHC014 virus. And what we found in both young and old mice, is that there was no protection offered by the live attenuated vaccine. Which was not particularly surprising, but we could have expected some neutralization. I guess this is an example of we didn't think it was going to work and I was actually proven correct. 

The other aspect was, we did the inverse experiment. So we have a number of live attenuated vaccine platforms that work. Whether we knock out particular aspects of the virus or efficiency of the virus. We knocked out different components. Our fidelity mutation virus has been used before as a vaccine platform. [name] has a delta-E protein deletion that he uses as a vaccine platform. And we wanted to ask: If we took SHC014 and we infected with a dose that caused disease, but wasn't lethal, and that's the maximum dose - could we offer protection? And what was interesting was we did see protection. If we infected the mice, a year old mice, with a dose that causes 10% weight loss, when we came back at 28 days and challenged with a lethal MA-15 challenge, those mice were completely protected. And so SHC014 - the spike components of SHC014 - are able to confer protection against the SARS infection. There are overlapping epitopes between these spike proteins.

When we looked at the actual level of the sera, what we found was that the neutralization is at 1:200. So, the dilution is very low. We need a lot of that sera to neutralize. For comparison, say, our vaccine platforms, are 1:1600. And so the expectation was that even though this vaccine works in the short term, long term immunity is probably not established. This tells us a couple of things. 1) There are common epitopes between this SHC014 spike and the SARS spike that we may be able to manipulate when we make antibodies to this region. They may actually have cross protection opportunities. But maybe another important aspect is when we went back and we challenged the mice with a lower dose - a dose that didn't cause weight loss - this was 100 p.f.u., this actually didn't offer protection. And so it signals that this spike protein, that there is overlap between the SHC014 spike and the SARS spike. That we can drive protection. But this may be an issue that the major antigen long term - it may be really difficult to tease this out. And so we may have to design new approaches to actually pick for broadly neutralizing antibodies as opposed to ones that are specific to the receptor binding domain, which is not common between SHC014 and the SARS spike.

VR: After all this was done, your virus - your bat coronavirus - was ready, right?

RC:  There's a practical issue here: Is the initial swap of the spike-like protein into the mouse adapted background... Tthe logic of doing that rather than going for the full length virus to start with is just it's a lot easier, and if it did not work there is no point going any further? Is that the thinking?

VM: There are number of reasons. 1) You have to remember, based on the evidence in the data, this is a virus that shouldn't have grown, right? And so you have the practical aspects of... You can make the spike protein and prove in the chimeric virus that it doesn't grow. So that's both the fastest and the cheapest option.

RC: And then you're done, and you don't have to make a whole virus, right.

VM: The other aspect is: Without that, if we'd known the virus the full length virus can grow, there are a number of reasons that it wouldn't grow that have nothing to do with spike itself. So those background changes in NSP9 or other components that are adapted, you may actually have a compatibility issue with the host. That either the immune response stops it or some interaction with some cellular machinery is required, and this virus may not grow, but it actually has nothing to do with binding and entry. It actually has to do with replication or the immune response.

RC: Ok so the contructs are really complimentary in that regard.

VM: And I think if we had known that SHC014 - the full length virus - could replicate, it's likely we still would have asked about the chimera, because the chimera tells us about the spike itself and isolates the difference of the spike. And as Ralph said, these pools exist and recombination is well established in coronaviruses. And in data that we've seen from our collaboraters at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, there's tons of... there are recombination hot spots in the spike. And they have all these spike sequences that they've compared. They actually see regions where
this is directly cut from another spike. And the only way this could happen is through recombination.

So, I understand - I mean, this gets into the hindsight of the results - if you know that the SHC014 is going to replicate, we would probably start with that. At the same time, we didn't know that upfront. And the second is, the chimera still has value in these responses.

RC: Right, ok.

KS: Also, it's a huge resource expenditure to do that. And like you said, it took time. Whereas you could do this - it sounds like - chimera much quicker.

VM: Yeah, I mean, your talking about 1200 - 1300 base pairs versus 28 kb and a bunch of different constructs. You're talking a month versus a couple of months.

KS: I have a question about the fact that you made this full length virus and you compare it to the SARS epidemic strain virus in mice. So I thought that you had to mouse adapt the virus. So what can you do with the viruses without mouse adaptation?

VM: In the mice we compare to the mouse adapted strain. In the human cells we compare to the epidemic strain.

KS: Well, I guess maybe I misinterpreted the figure then. I thought that you just put the non mouse adapted virus in and the non mouse adapted full length 014 in.

RC: It looks to me in 3d you got all three. You got Urbani, you got the reconstructed bat virus, and you've got the mouse virus. If I'm reading that correctly. So you're comparing all three.

VR: So your question is, why does the bat virus replicate in mice without adaptation. But it's not to human virus. Vineet, if you just take human
SARS isolate like Urbani and if you put it intranasally into mice, BALB/c, does it replicate at all?

VM: Yes, it replicates with roughly equivalent... The titers are lower than the mouse adapted strain, but there's a large amount of virus in there. And we have a number of resources. We have more depth on this question as well. We have a mouse that expresses human ACE-2 under [...] promoter. And we've done comparisons between the epidemic strain, the Urbani, from with no mouse adaptation to the SHC014. And we have interesting data there that
shows clear attenuation. But there are complicating factors in that mouse, it is not as clean as we would hope in terms of where it's expressed.

RC: But the epidemic strain, the Urbani strain, infects the mice, but it doesn't kill them? It doesn't look like it makes them very sick it.

VM: No. So, yeah, you're talking about... I had to pull up the paper, cause... So figure three is the full length SHC014 versus the epidemic SARS - the Urbani. And so the expectation... The wild type MA-15 - which isn't included in the paper - but those mice do die... I'm looking in the paper. The grey line is mouse adapated, the green line is the full length SHC virus, the black line is epidemic SARS, not mouse adapted.

VR: So the bat isolate SHC014 replicates in Vero cells, it replicates in human airway epithelial cells, and in mice it causes more weight loss than does Urbani or the mouse adapted strain, right?

VM: No. The SHC is the full length, it doesn't cause...

VR: Oh, the grey is the mouse adapted, sorry.

VM: The full length virus grows equivalent in Vero cells, is attenuated in primary human airway cells. And it's attenuated in mice in terms of replication. Neither the Urbani strain nor the full SHC strain cause any weight loss or pathogenicity.

VR: Got it. Yeah, I have a problem with grey versus black here. I can't see.

KS: Yeah, it's subtle.

VR: So that's the full length bat SARS related coronavirus. You made the entire genome as DNA and then rescued virus out of cells. And then you've used that for the experiments.

VM: Yap.

RC: And also another thing... It comes out of the same mouse experiments is that: The full length bat virus does not replicate as... Its pathogenicity in terms of weight loss in the mice is the same as the epidemic Urbani strain, but in terms of replication in the lungs the full length bat virus doesn't replicate as well as the Urbani strain. So by a couple of different criteria replication in human airway epithelial cells and replication in the mouse lungs, it is not as robust an infection as the epidemic strain, correct?

VM: Correct.

VR: Vineet I have been on Twitter all week defending this paper.

VM: Yes, I saw that.

VR: Because I know you need to do experiments. So I am happy to do that. And at one point I got an argument with someone who said, 'Why was this recombinant virus made, why didn't they just study the bat virus?' I said, they did, it's in the paper! And he said eventually sorry. But I think it shows that most people don't even read the paper. And they just read either something in some newspaper article or some online article, and then they make their decisions based on that. And I bet... So, two people have been quoted widely in the press, Simon Wain-Hobson and Richard Ebright. And they have been notable anti gain of function advocates. And they are quoted with negative sayings. And I would bet, and I could be wrong... I would bet they have not read this whole paper as much as we had and therefore don't appreciate what's in it. And I think this is really bad because this is driving the whole argument. And the people that don't read the papers are participating. Does that drive you crazy?

VM: I think there is a certain amount of knee jerk reaction to anything that's gain of function. I think it is important to consider, and Ralph and I have talked about this: There is a fundamental difference between pursuit of gain and being prepared for gain. I don't think anyone would argue that we expected this virus to be more pathogenic than the epidemic virus. And it hasn't been. I think being prepared for that possibility is important, and I think it's a consideration that we have to considered. But this is very different than mouse adaptions or transmission studies where
the gain is what we're seeking. Here, we don't know anything about these spike proteins. And it's very easy to be paranoid about the gain of function aspects to this, not being prepared for it. And we really do want that to be captured in any kind of rules that say: 'Well, we don't know what's going to happen, so you shouldn't do it.' I think you could argue that any adaptation of SARS, any manipulation of SARS, could result in a gain. So we shouldn't work with SARS? You know, the logic goes down that way: 'Oh well, you added GFP to SARS, that could lead to... It ignores the data that is available and ignores scientific... And we have been rightly proven wrong before, but I guess that gets to the stuff that we have in place. 

And I think it's hard, as Kathy mentioned, we cut a number of words from this manuscript, and I am not even sure that we would have covered the things that people are interested in. And I think this is a great opportunity talk about the process that we went through to come up with these viruses. And we've spent a lot of time figuring out the best way to get out these questions. And so we had local approval, we asked about these viruses putting it in the backbone. We had the pause, we had these interactions with NIH. And I think there was an aspect, and Ralph talked about it, that there is a black box when this stuff goes out. We don't know how it's reviewed or who is reviewing it. And we made the point that when we sent our materials to them that we didn't think that this was a gain. It could have been a gain. And if we had a gain, we specifically have criteria for what we define as a gain and what we would do. And yeah, Ralph described that the preparation of who you would notify and then what would happen.

So it was clear that you were prepared for that.

And I think, you know, Ralph went into it and we've talked about these studies... It's really hard to talk about... There is not a place in the paper to talk about what we'd do and how these counter measures are in place. I think we hear about these safety breaks and all of that, but we don't know... Each individual lab has its own protocols. We actually have gone through and we've counted the number of things that our lab does in terms of safety. And we have nine levels of PPE that we use in the containment lab. In our lab operating procedures we have 31 different things that we do in terms of our protocols. And lots of these things are overlapping elements - that if you don't do one, you should be captured by two or three of the other things. Outside of the lab in terms of, if we have a cold or or something like that, we do drills. We have another 18 things. So you have all of these layers, because there are accidents, there are mistakes, there is human errorY. ou can't exclude that. No one is perfect, and expecting perfection is problematic. 

But we spent a lot of time designing this approach, and I think that's often in the gain of function criticism ignored, that... I think it's very easy to think about the movies and you have scientists are at either one end of the spectrum - you are either the crazy scientist that never considered the ramifications of their work and made something that will destroy the world. Or you're the lone scientist that saves the world with your cure. And there's no in-between, there's no gray in the movie. So often, there's no gray applied to us. But I mean, we know what we're working with. We know probably better than anybody what the risks are. And I think Ralph talked about it. We don't want to be in a situation where a coronavirus emerges and we think we could have done something about that, or we could have been more prepared. At the same time we know that, is this a risk? Yes. What do we need to do to mitigate this risk? We put all those things in a place. We consider all these things. I think to imply that there's arrogance and, we just want to do this because we want to do it, is really painful. And I think scientists have to be aware of what they say, because what you say when you have a position at a university or you're a researcher can be misconstrued and taken out of context or used
in ways that you wouldn't really think. And I think we can have differences of opinions, but it's important that we consider the impact of... that one sentence can be taken out of context. And I think in our discussions it is important to consider that - critics and proponents on both ends of the spectrum have to consider that - oftentimes you're getting non-scientists or people who are reporting it that may not fully understand the width of the statement. 

VR: I think this is so right on. Because, you know you can't expect people to read your paper. That's fine. I think it is great to have a discussion. But the anti-GOF people are simply negative: 'You cannot do this, you're going to kill the world!' That's not a discussion, right? That's just saying, 'You can't do these experiments.' And I think the key here is... We try and provide a forum for virology here on TWiV. You can talk for an hour and a half about your work, you're not going to get that anywhere else in the world. No radio station, no interview, nothing. Not even a talk at ASV goes that long. And it's not back and forth. So I think this is an important... But unfortunately, Wain-Hobson and Ebright will not listen to this and get a real appreciation of really the amazing things we've learned from this work. But the other key here, I think, and part of the problem is, the press release from UNC was really bad. I don't know...

RC: Yeah, I thought they kind of blew that.

VR: The headline was picked up directly by several websites, and they say something like, 'Investigators show that bat viruses can go right into people'. And of course - I don't think you'd agree with that that's correct. And this is a problem. And, you know, I know we've talked about this a lot on TWiV, and I wish Alan were here. But often press releases get the wrong message, and investigators are not supposed to be writing them, but they should be more closely involved. So I think that's part of the problem here as well, right?

VM: I don't disagree. The press office of the university has a different purpose than the researcher, you know. I mean, you may argue... When Ralph and I had the discussion: Is it inaccurate what they said? I mean, you could argue that they didn't say anything that was not true. Is it inflammatory? Absolutely. Is that what brings eyes to the paper? Yes. I think, fundementally, when we looked at that - if you read the headline
and took that and just took the headline - it is bad. If you go into the paper, Ralph talks in the press release, about, 'We're further than you think', but like... There are important aspects... in the actual text that minimize that headline. But if you're taking it with the context that you want to... If you want eyes, the headline drove that. And it probably drove a lot of the negative press. Yeah, the Daily Mail took it: 'New SARS like virus could jump directly from bats to humans without mutating'.

KS: I think they could have come up with a headline and a lead line for the article that were equally catchy, but not so inflammatory. I wanted - because you talked about the biosafety and biosecurity stuff... There is almost a full column of discussion of it in the online methods, which, again, if people don't read the paper they are not going to recognize some of the things, and you've even elaborated some more of them. I wanted to know whether in submitting this paper you had to go through any additional hoops? Or was it simply submitted to Nature Medicine?

VM: We submitted it with paperwork from... Our final approval letter from the NIH... So, the kinetics of the approvals went such that we initially applied for approval to the work in the spring of 2014, to make the viruses. When the pause went into effect, we were not... This project was not under the stop order that the mers adaptation was. So we had until the roll day of the grant to respond. And we sent our paperwork where NIH asked for our process... And this grant covers a number of... it's a large collaborative grant that has ebola and other groups in it. And so there was a number of things that we had to answer. And at the end, in May, before the final approval, we basically got asked for a letter saying whether we could do these experiments... continue these experiments or not... And we actually submitted that paperwork to the journal with the understanding that they wanted it. 

RC: That was before it even went out for review, is that correct? Was there any comment from the reviewers that required extra action?

VM: We did it on the front end just so that it would be available to the editors and to the reviewers as needed. So we were proactive in that sense. We expected that this would be a question and had been... I think if we hadn't included it, people would have asked.

RC: Ok.

KS: Sure.

VR: But I do hope, and Ralph mentioned this - the people who are making these decisions about the future of these gain of function with flu and SARS viruses, I hope that they look at the science and really disregard all the hype, they disregard Ebright and Wain-Hobson, everything they say in the press. Because if you look at the science, you understand that this is important work. And I am afraid that this is going to be lost in the shuffle and we're going to... and science is going to lose out in the end. I am afraid of that, but i just don't know what's going on. Because as he said, we don't even know who is making these decisions.

VM: I don't want to characterize... I mean, we don't know the NIH process. They have been very supportive of this work.

VR: Great, that's great.

VM: They've been very complimentary. And in a lot of ways it is important to realize that while NIH is administrating the... They are at the front lines of this. The policy came down from the State Department, the pause is not an NIH directive. And so at a certain point, they are tasked with applying metrics that are not necessarily scientific, that may be more political than anything. And so they are in an as difficult as a position as we are. And we're all operating... I think, everybody I've interacted with on this, at the NIH and with oversight, we're doing our best, and we want to minimize any risk that there is. Implications, that... You know, I expect the Daily Mail or... I actually showed Ralph The Daily Sheeple, which... I mean, we kind of laugh of these. I mean, you kind of expect that the internet is what it is. I think it is really disheartening when you have scientists who have the opportunity and can look at the paper and just fully look at it, making these comments. And as you've said, I don't know
how in depth they've looked at it, but there were... It's been said 'words matter', especially when you're in positions of power. And so I would encourage critics and proponents to really consider that when you make comments. That you have to have a full understanding. And if you don't fully understand, there is no problem in asking and having this discussion. I've had 200 discussions about this, I have talked to a number of people. And, you know, was I surprised that it happened this way? I think in the culture that we live in, I think part of this was expected. But dialogue is really important. And it's important that we talk with people and get their feelings. 

I mean, I really value scientists that engage with me on this. Because I have my own biases. You know I think this work is really important. But, I mean part of me thinks that it is probably good that I am not making the final, you know, that NIH... It makes it easy that NIH makes this final decision, because I have real interest in this, one way or the other. With that being said, I have lots of ideas and lots of interesting things that I can follow up on. It's important that this work be done. But if society or scientists, scientific society thinks that it is too risky, I can understand that. 

VR: Well, if you have a good discussion and that's the outcome, that's fine. But, you know, Ebright says, the only impact of this work is the creation of a new non-natural risk, is absurd! It is patently absurd to say that! He can't have read the paper, right? This is what makes me crazy. But you're very level-headed, Vineet. So I am glad that you're doing this work. And I do think that people need to talk about this. You know, I'd like to have Wain-Hobson on TWiV and talk about it. And, you know, he is supposedly a smart guy. Let him tell us why he is really concerned,
and we can we can go over it. I think we have the best forum for that here to do that.

RC: We have done several of these episodes where we've gone over a paper that is controversial in this regard. And I have to say that for me personally, every time we do this and go through an episode, when we're done I come away thinking, first of all, that there is not
nearly the danger that - or none - that people make a flap about. And second, I put myself in the position of how much I've learned from this paper  and what I would miss if we didn't have this work. And it's amazing, okay, because you learn so much from this stuff. And without it there is this vacuum, it doesn't make any sense.

VR: Kathy, what's your schedule, you need to leave?

KS: No, no, I am fine.

VR: Ok, cause...

KS: No I have this gonna skip that.

VR: But you have a flight to leave at one thirty?

KS: Yeah that's at one fifteen.

VR: We'll be done by that.

KS: I hope so.

VM: I just want to add: I think it is important, and I think part of it has been... We have a lot of questions, and Ralph gets questions about the transmissible flu studies, and it is really hard to comment on them. Because we work with respiratory viruses, there are similarities between SARS and flu, but the ins and outs of flu are difficult. Understanding all the literature all that. And these people who are working in these areas really know these areas really well, and so... My wife is an educator, so she is a teacher. And I said that it is kind of like asking a kindergarten teacher what to do with senior level English class. It is not that they can't. I can comment on flu, but I don't have the experience or the understanding that someone who has all the experience and understanding would. I think that's important. And I think often we look at these groups and say, oh well, you guys are biased, you guys are working on the literature.

VR: Exactly, exactly.

VM: But at the same time it is hard to find people that aren't biased in some way to comment on it and who have... I read these journals and honestly, if I wasn't working on this paper, I may have looked at the figures, I don't know whether I would have read the abstract. I would have looked at the figures, and I would have moved on. It's hard to make strong statements one way or the other. But I think it's also important, you know... My opinions, my thoughts are often discounted by gain of function, because I am right there. I do have a conflict, rightly. But at the same time, having a conflict is... It is also how people say, well, you know, these people who study climate change have a conflict, so they can't talk. It's of kind of a ridiculous...

VR: Who is better, as you say, who is those better qualified? So the gain of function opponents - some of them are scientists, Wain-Hobson is a virologist, but he may not have read these. And so who is going to make the decision? That's what I am concerned about. And, you know, to
circle back to something you said earlier, 'These newspaper online articles don't matter too much'. But you know what? I think Congress sees them! Unfortunately, I think their staff gives it to them and that informs their opinion! And it's really unfortunate, and I don't know how to combat that. It is a big communication issue for sure. 

VM: Yeah, and I think it gets back to there are a number of things that... The gain of function arguments drew clear lines. And it was interesting seeing... I could have predicted... I think we all know who the critics are and who would have been quoted in these stories, I think. And it gets to... You know, they point out a conflict for me or Ralph in these studies. But if you are on record as being against gain of function eight, ten, twenty times. If that's your claim to fame, aren't you also in conflict? I think that is not considered when... I mean, I don't know Dr Wain-Hobson at all. I am not familiar what his scientific work is. But I do know he is a gain of function critic. And if that's what you are known for, is that is that relevant? I don't know, but, I think...

VR: I agree. I think that they have an agenda. They just don't like this, the idea of this, and so they will not even read the paper to understand it. They will say, 'No, you shouldn't be doing these experiments, period. And the public says, 'Ok, this is a scientist, this is a virologist, so
it must mean something.' But, to their credit, some of these articles did quote Ralph, which is good. They have both sides, which you are supposed to do. But of course the headlines don't reflect that at all.

VM: Well, Ralph and I talked about it. You have these interviews that can be long, but...

KS: They take a sound bite out of it.

VM: I think, and having this this platform is great for it. There is a lot of nuance to this. If you don't know anything about the background behind it... Why didn't we make the full length virus to start with? is a reasonable question based on that. And I think we've talked about why we started with a chimera here. But there aren't great platforms for explaining that.

VR: I think TWiV is a great platform.

VM: And I am happy to chat about this whenever you like. 

VR: I just don't know why more people don't listen. I realize we're long, but... And we do have... I have a bias, but that gets founded in good science. But there's nowhere else, as I've said, where people could talk in depth about this and get the real story, right? Am I wrong about that, anyone?

KS: I think it is good to talk in depth. I am just going to get out and say I am probably a pollyana about this, but I really hope that Simon Wain-Hobson and Richard Ebright read this paper. If they didn't, then they really don't have any business talking about this. As scientists, they should do that.

RC: Not just read it - study it!

VR: I doubt it. I understand your position, but I doubt it. From what he said, how can you say this doesn't give us any information? We've just talked about this for an hour and a half about all the cool stuff we've learned, right?

KS: I see your point, and I agree. But, you know, they can read it and, like Rich said - if they just read it and didn't study it, they just read the abstract and looked at the figures and read the press release - it is not enough.

VR: I agree. That's what we are trying to do here, is to supply people with a digestible form of the information. I wrote a blog post yesterday where I tried to make it simple for people.

KS: It is a really good blog post. People should go to it. Virology.ws.

VR: I just don't think people will read it. People will not listen. We have a lot of great listeners and readers, but not enough to inform this
whole debate, I'm afraid. I would love to dedicate this episode to just this one topic. I don't want to... We had another topic planned, but we'll
put that for another time.

Now, Vineet, how much more time do you have in the Baric lab, what's your plan?

VM: Ralph has told me I am transitioning. He is like, 'Oh weren't you on that email?' And I'll be like, 'I wasn't on that email for that meeting.' And he is like, 'Oh, I am transitioning you out, I keep forgetting that.' So, I am currently in the job search mode. 

And so I expect I will be here... I work on this stuff, and as I mentioned earlier, there's lots of interesting host components about the genetic, the cc, and having - how much is driven by the host genetics and the aging aspects of coronavirus disease. I think what's interesting is a virus that is circulating in bats - just as important is that it actually interacts with the right human for emergence. The genetic components of the human can drive it and the age of the person that's there. You know, coronaviruses, SARS and MERS - the lethality goes way up as you get older. And so susceptibility and changes in our host responses as we get older are really driving this response. And that's one of the things I am really interested in. Finding the host factors both in the genetic component, the genetic side, and I think Kathy mentioned it, in Lisa's post genetics paper, she really drives in to the genetic aspects. And I've got some funding for doing aging work, looking at aging in mice and asking why susceptibility is changing as the mice get older. And hopefully we can apply that to human disease.

VR: Very interesting. So, do you want to have an academic position, is that your goal?

VM: That is the plan at moment. I think I want an academic position.

VR: And you'll continue coronavirus work, right? 

VM: Yeah, primarily. Using coronavirus work, using coronaviruses as a platform. But I think, relating it to flu and other other viruses, is really a great opportunity to interact with other groups, really driving our understanding of... I think often we've worked in silos of our own individual viruses. But comparing... And work we've done with [name] group, comparing SARS and high path flus and MERS, has really given us real great insights in how the host is controlling viruses globally and how different viruses use similar approaches to drive these different responses. And so I think there is great virology there. There is great interest in host immunity. And of course we have these emerging viruses that are really interesting, too.

VR: What did you do your PhD in, was it virology?

VM: I went to Washington University in St Louis. I was in the immunology programme. And I work with David Lieb on [name] simplex virus working on how working at host components that were driving differential disease. I focused on... There is an innate component that people had used. People are familiar with IRF-3 and IRF-7 and the interferon responses. And so I was looking at how different tissues have different requirements. So the brain really requires IRF-3 to control the encephalitis portion. And without IRF-3 could have control at peripheral locations but once it got to the brain the brain really needed this internal IRF-3 more so than the systemic responses. And so that's kind of where I jumped into, looking at... I was interested primarily in immunity I think. I operate on... If I am on a group of virologists I say I am an immunologist if I am with a group of immunologists I say I am a virologist.

VR: That's good. Matt Freeman told me that you would be a great spokesperson for this paper, and he was absolutely right. You are really articulate and calm and level headed, and i'm looking forward to a great career in virology from you.

VM: Well, I appreciate that.

RC: I was thinking the same thing: great spokesman for the paper. 

VM: I appreciate that. And that's the nicest thing I think I've ever heard from Matt about me.

VR: He's a tough guy.

KS: He also told me good things about you in person yesterday.

RM: I imagine that our relationship is that we would never say the nice things that we think about those people to them. Matt is a great person, and he has really helped me in understanding how the transition is working.

I think what's underestimated, and I think Julie Pfeiffer had kind of mentioned it, about... In all these gain of function stuff, one of the conversations I had with a lot of people that worked with me, with Matt, with Tim Sheehan who is in our lab, other young people: Is it really worth this effort? We all want to do really good science, and we all have lots of ideas. Are we better off doing this with MHV and not doing it with SARS? Because I mean, it's a consideration. I mean, we worry, I worry... You know, Matt's talked about this with me: You make a mistake in your BSL-3 lab, an innocuous mistake, and you're shut down. So am I taking a huge career risk? It's very easy for me to do a lot of this work with the umbrella of knowing how well established Ralph and how respected he this and having these in place. But as a junior investigator, I have to ask myself the question: Is it worth the effort? Is my department going to stand behind me if I make a mistake or if there is a problem or if there is controversy?I think UNC is commited to Ralph in a way that he can go out and have these discussions and do these kind of works. It is important to remember that this kind of work and the criticism and all that impacts people. I think it goes down the line: Young scientists are really - we really do think about these things and how they affect our career, for bad or for good.

VR: That's a great point. And this is something that Julie Pfeiffer brought up originally with the moratorium, right? She wrote a little piece in MBio about how it's affecting the future scientists. And you need, of course you need to find a department that will support you. And, you know, when you are interviewed, you got to bring that up, you know. 'Here, this is tricky stuff. Are you going to support me?'

I tell you, Vineet, if I were a chair and I hired you, I'd give you a hundred percent support for this. So, but I'm not, so that doesn't do you any good. So it just makes you feel good. But that's a great point,  it really is.

